---
title: Universal JavaScript with React
layout: post
category: code
tags: react
---



As someone who is still wrapping my head around the wide, wide world of web development, it’s often hard to distinguish hype from meaningful changes in the industry. Recently, I think I found one of the latter, and it involves two of the most-hyped things around: Universal JavaScript and React.

Noted Node.js developer [Tim Oxley](https://twitter.com/secoif) conducted a webinar entitled ["React.js and Universal JavaScript Applications.”](https://vimeo.com/149291373) I’m just starting to dip my toe into the React waters, and I’m a fanboy of the NodeSource crew (of which Tim is a part), so watching this presentation was a no-brainer for me. 

The basic takeaway is this: Using React on both the front and back ends allows the best of both worlds in web development. What are these two worlds? In my mind, it’s Rails vs. SPA’s. Ruby on Rails and its ilk do the heavy lifting on the server, rendering HTML and all the rest in order to send a fully-baked experience out to the client. SPA’s (or Single Page Apps), on the other hand, simply bring the data into the browser, and then a magical framework (I’m looking at you, Angular) creates the user experience right there.

Like everything in software engineering, there are tradeoffs. A back-end solution doesn’t tax the client as much, but could lead to diminished user experience by way of numerous server calls throughout the interaction. SPA’s require a lot of code to be loaded up front before anything can happen in the browser. This is a particular problem on mobile where loading a bulky framework could slow everything down to a crawl.

Oxley proposes a mix, a hybrid solution. First-time visitors to a site could be served up resources generated by the server, getting the user up and running as soon as possible. From there, client-side React would do what SPA’s normally and use the power of the browser to make the magic happen. The user gets to start consuming the content immediately, and as soon as everything is loaded, the SPA takes over. 

If this works—and while I haven’t implemented it myself, "In Tim I Trust"—then universal (or isomorphic) JavaScript is no longer pie in the sky. A paradigm-shifting use case has been found, and reusing code on both ends of the stack will finally bear some juicy, delicious fruit. 

Now I just need to come up with a project that needs this solution. I’m not above having the tail wag the dog a bit. But first, I need to get more comfortable with React itself. That’s what’s next, so stay tuned. 
